An Introduction to 
 FISHING
                                    Fishing 
 ﬁGod never did make a more calm, 
 quiet, innocent recreation ....ﬂ 
Izaak Walton 
2 | An Introduction to Fishing 
Fishing is a great way to spend 
 a day. You can take a lunch and 
 picnic as you ˜sh. You can camp 
 near a lake. You can hike or boat to 
 a ˜shing spot. Many people build 
 their vacations around ˜shing. Be 
 sure to take your family or your 
 friends along, for there is no more 
 sociable activity. 
Missouri has more than 800,000 
acres of surface water, and most 
of it provides great ˜shing. Our 

waters hold ancient paddle˜sh, 

wary largemouth bass, and tasty 

bluegillŠmore than 200 di˚erent 

species. About 40 of those ˜sh 

species are the targets of anglers. 
Some Missourians ˜sh for sport 
or relaxation, while others ˜sh only 

for food. Regardless of motivation, 

the majority of anglers reap all the 

bene˜ts of ˜shing. They spend 

quality time on the water and then 

return home to a satisfying meal 

of fried or grilled ˜sh they have 

caught themselves. 
One of the joys of ˜shing is that 
it can be fun and productive at 

any skill level. You can complicate 

the sport with jargon and 

sophisticated equipment, but the 

whole sport can be pared down 

to some basic equipment and 

techniques. 
This publication presents those 
basics to you. It would take many 

volumes to introduce you to all the 

species of ˜sh, all the methods, 

and all the lures, and so much 

information at once would be 

overwhelming. 
Instead, we want to be your 
guide for your ˜rst ˜shing trips. Let 

us go with you hand-in-hand to 

the water and patiently teach you 

how to catch some ˜sh. We know 

that once you start ˜shing, you will 

quickly learn to love the sport. 
David Stonner 
                                                       Rod and Reel 
You could catch ˜sh with a stick, some 
string and a safety pin. In a similar vein, 

you could also drive nails with a rock. But 

wouldn™t it be easier to use a hammer? 
Modern ˜shing reels, rods, line, and 
hooks take the place of a stick, string, and 

pin. They are designed to improve your 

˜sh catching ability and to decrease your 

frustration. Like the hammer, a ˜shing rod 

and reel is a purchase that will serve you 

over and over again. 
Fortunately, taking this giant 
evolutionary step from stick and string to a 

modern and suitable ˜shing rod and reel is 

not expensive. 
You might start by borrowing some 
equipment from a relative or friend to 

begin ˜shing. Your request could lead 

to a ˜shing outing with an experienced 

partner.  You could also use equipment 

from the many Missouri Department of 

Conservation (MDC) rod and reel loaner 

locations (available online at 
short.mdc. 
mo.gov/Z4X
). Most beginners use spin-˜shing 
equipment. In spin ˜shing, the reel lays line 

around a ˜xed spool, the way you might 

wind thread on a spool. The spool end 

points toward the guides on the rod, and 

line falls o˚ it in loops when you cast. 
Spin-˜shing reels are of two types: 
closed-faced (or spin-casting) and open-

faced (or spinning). The spin-casting reel 

has a cap with a hole in it over the top of 

the spool. On the open-faced reel, you can 

see the entire spool and the line wound on 

it. (See illustrations on page 7.) 
Closed-faced reels have either a push 
button or a lever that, when depressed, 

allows line to fall o˚ the spool. Open-faced 

reels have a semicircular metal device 

known as a bail, which guides line onto the 

spool when closed and allows line to be 

released when open. 
You can pick either spin-casting or 
open-faced reels. Note from the pictures on 

Page 7 that the push-button reel requires 

a di˚erent rod handle and grip than do the 

reels with a bail or a lever. 
You will want a good, all-purpose 
rod-and-reel combination to start withŠ 

something that will let you catch ˜sh of all 

sizes. Look for or ask a clerk in a sporting 

goods store for a medium-light rod from 5 

1/2 to 6 1/2 feet long and a matching reel 

that will handle lines from 4-pound test to 

12-pound test. (The ﬁpound testﬂ tells you 

how strong the line is.) Medium-light tackle 

is su˛cient for ˜shing ponds, small lakes 

and rivers, and even trout parks. 
Rod Tip 
Line 
Guides 
Rod 

Handle 

Trigger 
Grip 
Reel Handle 
Reel Seat 
Thumb Button 
Drag Adjustment 
Line 

Opening 
Cover 
Rod and Reel photos: Cli˚ White 
An Introduction to Fishing  
| 3 
        
                     
          
         
 
 
 
     Stocking a Basic Tackle Box 
Sporting goods departments and bait shops often stock mind-boggling 

inventories of equipment and accessories. They o˚er arti˜cial baits in every color 

and size. Plus you™ll encounter a whirlwind of bugs, bobbers, sinkers, hooks, and 

swivels. 
Don™t be misled; you don™t need a garage full of equipment to go ˜shing. In 
fact, the following basic items will equip you nicely for your ˜rst outings. 
Shopping List 
Ł A Summary of Missouri 

Fishing Regulations 
Ł Bait and lures 
Ł Hooks 

» Size 6 
» 16Œ20 
Ł Sinkers 

» Assorted sizes of split 

shot 
» One package of three 

bell sinkers, ½ ounce 
Ł Bobbers 
Ł Spare ˜shing line 

» Mono˜lament line, 6
-to 12-pound test 
» 4-pound test or less 
Ł Needle-nosed pliers and 

nail clippers 
Ł Tape measure 
Ł Stringer (or ˜sh basket) 
Ł Landing net 
Ł First aid kit 
Ł Sunscreen and insect 

repellent 
Ł Area map 
Ł Know Your Catch
 ˜sh ID 

booklet 
Line: Your Link to the Fish 
We suggest starting with 8-pound test mono˜lament line. 

People sometimes use lighter line to cast farther or to get 

more bites from skittish ˜sh or heavier lines to pull out 

of snags, but 8-pound test line is a good compromise for 

most ˜sh. Choose clear, light blue or green line for your 

starting out˜t. 
Check your reel or the instructions that came with it to 
determine how much 8-pound-test line it will hold. Usually 

a 100-yard spool is large enough to ˜ll a medium-light reel. 
Follow the instructions that come with your reel and 
line before ˜lling. The reel is full when the wrapped line is 

about 1/8 inch from the outside edge of the spool. Don™t 

allow knots in your line, except at the end. Knots both 

weaken line and make it di˛cult to cast. 
Fish: David Stonner; Tackle Box: Cli˚ White 
4 | An Introduction to Fishing 
     
       
                                      Casting 
Reel: Cli˚ White; Casting Illustration: David Besenger 
Casting is a mechanical activity. The ˜shing rod extends 
your arm and allows you to ﬁthrowﬂ your lure or bait a long 

distance with little e˚ort. Keep in mind that casting is a 

matter of timing, not strength. 
We™ll teach you a reliable one-stroke cast. 

You can learn to cast on the water, or head to your 
backyard or a nearby park and throw to targets on the grass. 

Practice with a bell sinker or a casting plug attached to the 

end of your line. A few 10-minute sessions will make you 

pro˜cient enough to ˜sh. There are six steps to a successful 

cast: grip, stance, aim, cast, release, and follow-through. 
Grip 
If you are right-handed, grip the rod handle with your right 

hand, placing your fore˜nger on the rod handle trigger. If 

you are left-handed, grip the rod handle with your left hand, 

placing your fore˜nger on the rod handle trigger. Place your 

thumb on the release button but do not press it yet. 
Stance 
Face your target with feet shoulder-width apart. If you are 

right-handed, put your right foot forward. If you are left-

handed, put your left foot forward. More of your weight 

should be on your forward foot, also known as the aiming 

foot. Keeping your body and target in a straight line 

increases your chances for a successful cast. 
Aim 
Aiming has already begun with a proper stance. The 

casting arm, the rod, and eye need to be in alignment. 

Place the rod in front of your body, pointing at the target. 

Keep your elbow bent at approximately a right angle. Keep 

your eye on the target and not the rod. Make a point to 

check to see what™s behind you. Press the push button 

with your right thumb (if you are right-handed) and raise 

the rod to the 2 o™clock position. The right hand, rod, and 
reel should all be in 
direct line with the right 
eye, right foot, and target. This 
places the rod and lure in natural line 
with the target. Keep your eye focused 

on the target during the entire cast. 
Cast 
Hold the rod so that the tip is at eye level and centered 

on the target. Your elbow should be close to, but not 

touching, your body. With a smooth upward motion, start 

the cast by raising your hand almost to eye level, bending 

the wrist and elbow so that the rod extends over your 

head and behind you. When the rod reaches the 11 or 10 

o™clock position, the weight of the plug will cause the rod 

to bend to the rear. As it does, bring the rod forward in a 

crisp downstroke with the forearm, applying only a slight 

wrist motion forward. 
Release 
When your forearm, wrist, and rod reach the 1 o™clock 

position on the forward cast, release the push button with 

your thumb and allow the plug to travel toward the target. 

Line is released when the push button is released. The 

correct release usually occurs when the rod is between 1 

and 2 o™clock, but this will take some practice. 
Follow-through 
As the plug is released, your arm should follow through to 
 about the 3 o™clock position. 
Note:
 The cast should begin with the plug hanging 
 about 1 inch below the rod tip. If more casting distance 
 is needed, increase the starting distance from the plug 
 to the rod tip in 1-inch increments, until the desired 
 distance is obtained. The farther the plug starts from the 
 rod tip, the harder it will be to achieve accuracy. Holding 
 the plug against the rod tip can cause excessive wear to 
 the tip guide, which can a˚ect accuracy. The best rule 
 of thumb is to start with the plug hanging 1 inch below 
 the rod tip, and then experiment. 
Of course, you™ll get even better with more practice. 

If your lure shoots up in the air and doesn™t go very 
 far, you probably released the line too early. If the lure 
 smacks into the ground in front of you, you released the 
 line too late. 
 Remember that the cast has no sudden or jerky 
motions. Practice until it becomes smooth and nearly 

e˚ortless. 
An Introduction to Fishing  
| 5 
                 Filling the reel spool 
Thread the line through the spool cap or under the 
bail to start. Tie one end of the line to your reel spool 

with an arbor knot, and then reel it on. Most spools of 

line come with suggestions on how to avoid line twist 

when ˜lling your reel. 
How to tie an arbor knot 
1.
 Wrap the tag end of your line around your reel spool. 

2.
 Tie an overhand knot in the tag end. This will keep 

the end from pulling through the main knot. 

3.
 Tie another overhand knot with the line around the 

spool. 

4.
 Wet the main knot and pull it down tight onto the 

spool. Make sure the ˜rst overhand knot pulls in tight to 

this main knot. 
How A Drag Works 
Fishing reels have a drag to prevent the weight 

and pull of a ˜sh from snapping the line, 

making it possible to land even large ˜sh with 

light lines. 
Before ˜shing, set the drag to release line 
before the breaking point of the line is reached. 
When a big ˜sh is pulling, line will come o˚ 
the reel, sometimes making a clicking sound. 

Learn to recognize when the drag is letting a 

˜sh run and don™t reel during that time, or your 

line will twist. Avoid the temptation to tighten 

the drag while ˜ghting a ˜sh. 
Cli˚ White 
6 | An Introduction to Fishing 
           Finer Points 
All anglers do not cast alike. As you ˜sh, you will develop 
 your own casting style. You will also learn special casts, 
 such as the sidearm cast or underarm ˝ip, that will allow 
 you to throw a lure when branches or brush make the 
 overhand cast impossible. All casts, however, depend on 
 the basic back and forth motion. That™s the best way to 
 take mechanical advantage of the rod. Here are some tips 
 to improve your casting: 
Ł  Longer rods generally allow you to cast farther, if they 
 are correctly matched to the weight of the lure or bait. 
 Make sure your reel is ˜lled to capacity, so the line does 
 not drag on the reel spool. 
Ł  If you need more distance, use a two- hand grip and 
 bring the arm back more quickly on the backcast, 
 loading the rod with more energy potential. 
Ł  Casting into a strong wind requires a lower trajectory, 
 which is achieved by releasing the line slightly later in 
 the forward part of the cast. 
Ł  Accuracy is often more important than distance. Many 
 ˜sh remain near protective cover and will strike only 
 those lures that come into their immediate vicinity. 
Ł  If your lure bounces or skitters across the water, you are 
 releasing the line too late. Release earlier for a higher 
 trajectory. Remember the bouncing technique, though, 
 for you may someday want to skip your lure under a 
 dock or raft. 
Ł  Improve your accuracy by casting to de˜nite targets, 
 even while on the water. Make sure you focus on your 
 target while casting. 
Ł  If you sense you™ve cast too far, you can slow the lure 
 by providing some drag on the line with your ˜ngers or 
 by lifting the rod so that the line drags against the end 
 guide, instead of ˝owing through it. 
Ł  Many problems with distance or accuracy result from 
 holding the rod too tightly. Use the minimum amount 
 of force necessary to hold the rod through the cast. 
 Seizing the rod tightens muscles and restricts ˝uidity, 
 especially in your wrist. The lighter the grip, the more 
 control and distance. 
Ł  Casting heavy lures or baits requires more of a lob 
 than a cast. Increase slightly the distance between 
 the lure and the rod tip, and use more of a sidearm 
 cast. Bring the rod back more slowly and pause longer 
 before beginning the forward cast. Use your entire arm, 
 instead of just the forearm, for casting. 
Spin-˜shing reels and rods and how anglers hold them 
Open-faced reel 
The rod is held in the right hand with the reel on the 

underside for both casting and retrieving. Right-hand 

anglers reel with their left hand. Closed-faced reels 

with levers are also held in this position. 
Spin-casting reel 

The rod is held with the reel up. Cast with the rod in 

the right hand and switch the rod to the left hand 

before retrieving. Reel with the right hand.  (Some 

reels allow you to switch the handle to the other side 

of the reel if you prefer.) 
Cli˚ White 
An Introduction to Fishing  
| 7 
     
  
                      
                          Ł Rigging Up 
 Now that you™ve acquired some ˜shing gear and learned 
how to cast, it™s time to arm your ˜shing pole for action. 

The end of your line is the scene of all the action. Here 

you™ll tie a hook or lure and, perhaps, fasten on split shot 

sinkers, swivels, or bobbers. 
Use the improved clinch to tie on hooks and lures. 
Improved Clinch Knot 
There are dozens of di˚erent knots, but most anglers 

settle on one or two favorite knots to tie line to reels, 

hooks, swivels, and lures. The improved clinch knot is 

strong and easy to tie, even with cold, wet ˜ngers. 
1. 
Run the end of the line through the eye of a hook 
about 6 inches and fold it back on itself. 
2. 
Leaving a loop (Loop 1) near the eye, wrap the end of 
the line around the standing (or long piece of line held in 

your hand) about ˜ve complete turns. 
Loop 1 
Standing 
Cord 
3. 
Pass the end back up through Loop 1 (the loop beside 
the eye). This creates another loop (Loop 2) between the 

standing cord and Loop 1. 
Standing 
Cord 
Loop 1 
Loop 2 
4. 
Pass the end down through Loop 2 and out along 
the side of the standing cord. You™ll ˜nd it helpful to use 

the ˜ngers holding the hook to help you guide the end 

through the loop. 
Standing 
Cord 
Loop 2 
8 | An Introduction to Fishing 
Rubber Grip  Egg  Bullet  Split Shot 
5. 
Pull on both the line and the tag end to tighten 
the knot and snug it up to the eye. The knot will come 

together more smoothly if you moisten the line with saliva 

before tightening. Trim the tag end about 1/4 inch away 

from the knot. 
Finished Knot 
How you rig depends partly on the kind of ˜sh you 
hope to catch. Cat˜sh usually search for food near the 

bottom, so you need weight to keep your bait near the 

˜sh. Crappie and many other pan˜sh often swim a few feet 

beneath the surface, and a bobber will hold your bait up 

where the ˜sh can see it. 
Generally, use the lightest tackle you can. Holding your 
bait on the bottom of a pond on a calm day, for example, 

doesn™t require a large sinker. One or two split shot will 

do, and the lighter weight is less likely to alert ˜sh that are 

sampling your bait. 
Similarly, use a small bobber and balance it with 
enough split shot beneath that the ˜sh can pull your 

bobber down without much resistance. 
Spring  Slip  Foam  Plastic
                                                    Torpedo Round 
Sinkers and Bobbers: Cli˚ White 
  l What you should use for bait also depends on the kind 
 of ˜sh you™re after. (See the chart on Page 11.) The best all 
 around bait is probably a worm or a part of a nightcrawler, 
 both of which will catch pan˜sh and trout, as well as most 
 larger species. Hook the worm several times through, or 
 pinch o˚ part of a nightcrawler and run the hook through 
 it. 
Baited Hooks 
Keep baits fresh. With few exceptions, fresh bait will attract 
 more bites than old bait. 
 Bobber Rig 
Bottom Fishing Rig 
4 to 10 
inches 
4 to 10 
inches 
David Besenger 
An Introduction to Fishing  
| 9 
                         p Hooks come in many sizes and shapes. An ideal hook 
is one that is small enough to slip into a ˜sh™s mouth, yet 
large enough to hold its lip securely. Hooks are measured 

with a numbering system that runs from No. 20 to No. 0 Š 

the bigger the number, the smaller the hook. For example, 

a No. 20 hook is much smaller than a No. 6 hook. 
When ˜shing with natural or live bait, a package with 
an assortment of hooks ranging from sizes No. 6 through 

No. 10 is good to have. However, when ˜shing for cat˜sh 

or other large ˜sh, larger hooks are needed, such as No. 2 

through No. 6. Trout ˜shing requires small hooks in the No. 

14 to No. 20 range. 
Aberdeen Hook 
The Aberdeen hook has an elongated shank and wide 

gap. Mostly used with worms, minnows, and insect larvae, 

the Aberdeen allows for easy removal from a ˜sh, as the 

shank is usually visible for easy access. This hook is a good 

beginner™s hook. The long shank helps anglers get a safer 

feel for unhooking ˜sh, and baiting is easier than if using 

short-shank hooks. 
Bait-holder Hook 
Bait-holder hooks are recognizable by a series of two 

or more barbs on the shank. Anglers who ˜sh with 

nightcrawlers often use them. These barbs help hold the 

worms on the shank. This keeps bait on the hook longer 

and limits bait loss from small ˜sh that try to pull the worm 

o˚ the hook. 
Treble Hook 
The treble hook is actually three single hooks stuck 

together. Used most often with lures, but are also used to 

hold doughbait or stinkbait because they hold soft bait 

better than single hooks. 
Types of Lures and Baits 
Oversized Plug 
Large 
Bucktail Spinner 
Spoons 
Crankbaits 
Flies 
Aberdeen                   Bait-holder                  Treble 
Hooks: Cli˚ White; Spoons, Crankbaits, Flies: David Stonner 
10 | An Introduction to Fishing 
 E-Yl Ł Bait Chart 
Species
 Baits
 Lures*
 Bluegill 
worms, insect larvae, crickets 
jigs, ˝ies, small spinners 
Crappie 
minnows, worms 
jigs, spinners, small crankbaits 
Cat˜sh 
worms, stinkbaits, cheese, cut bait 
occasionally take jigging spoons or crankbaits 
Bass 
minnows, nightcrawlers 
plastic baits, spinnerbaits, crankbaits, jigs, topwater 
lures, jigging spoons 
Carp 
worms, doughballs 
rarely strike arti˜cials 
Trout** 
worms, minnows, grasshoppers, dough balls 
spinners, small crankbaits (e.g., cray˜sh imitations), ˝ies 
Walleye 
minnows, nightcrawlers 
jigs, crankbaits, jigging spoons 
Muskellunge 
large minnows 
large bucktail spinners, oversized plugs 
* Choose sizes and lures based on the size of the ˜sh. Don™t expect bluegills, for example, to eat a big minnow or muskellunge to attack a small ˝y. 
** Many trout ˜shing areas have restrictions on natural baits, so check the 
Wildlife Code of Missouri
 before venturing out. 
David Stonner 
Spinnerbaits 
Surface Lures 
Jigs 
Soft Plastic Lures 
An Introduction to Fishing  
| 11 
                                                                            About Fish 
Fish are cold-blooded, which means that their body 
temperatures are about the same as their surrounding 

environment. Because they don™t produce body heat, ˜sh 

must ˜nd and remain in water that they are adapted for. 
A ˜sh™s streamlined shape helps it move through the 
water. The water also helps ﬁ˝oatﬂ ˜sh; many species 

can make themselves lighter or heavier in the water by 

increasing or decreasing the amount of gas in their swim 

bladders. 
A ˜sh swims by alternately contracting muscles along 
each side, which causes its tail to sweep and propel the 

˜sh forward. The smaller ˜ns assist with forward and 

backward movement, provide stability and steering, and 

may help the ˜sh brake. 
Fish markings usually serve as camou˝age. For 
example, ˜sh that are found near rocks or weeds often 

have blotches or bars on their sides. Many ˜sh are dark on 

top and light beneath, making them more inconspicuous 

when viewed from above or below, respectively. 
Most ˜sh have scales, which are embedded into the 
skin and are arranged in overlapping rows. Scales may be 

thick and tough, as in the sun˜sh, or extremely small, as in 
Fish Senses 
Lateral line:
 Nerve endings along a row of 
pores on either side of a ˜sh from gills to tail 

detect minute changes in ˝ow or water pressure, 

allowing the ˜sh to detect other ˜shes, preferred 

habitats, predators, and other objects. 

Touch:
 Fish can detect minute temperature 
di˚erences and can discriminate between hard 

and soft baits. Fish are more likely to hold soft bait 

longer. 

Sight:
 Fish are able to see well, but not in muddy 
water or low light. Out of the water, a ˜sh™s vision is 

very restricted. 

Hearing:
 Water conducts sound better than air, 
and ˜sh hear directly through bone structures in 

their head called otoliths. Noise on the bank or 

dock may attract or spook ˜sh. 

Taste:
 Most ˜sh do not rely much on taste, 
but cat˜sh and bullheads have taste buds 

concentrated on their barbels (whiskers) that help 

them ˜nd food. 

Smell:
 Fish have a nasal sac to help them detect 
odor. Night feeders or ˜sh that live in muddy 

water have a highly re˜ned sense of smell. 
trout. Cat˜sh have a tough skin, instead of scales. Growth 

marks on scales reveal the age of ˜sh, just as tree rings 

show the age of trees. 
The life span of most of our game˜sh is about 4-6 years, 
but some of them live more than 10 years. Fish continue to 

grow in length and girth as they get older. 
Many ˜sh swim in groups or schools; solitary ˜sh may 
concentrate when a feeding opportunity presents itself. 
Some ˜sh wander constantly in search of food; others 
have narrowly de˜ned home ranges and wait for food to 

come close enough to ambush. 
Fish often make regular daily movements between 
feeding and resting places, seasonal movements to 

summer and winter habitat, and annual movements 

to traditional spawning areas. Many species travel long 

distances to spawn. Spawning activity concentrates ˜sh 

and makes them easier to ˜nd and catch. 
Can they hurt me? 
Fish are not inherently dangerous or threatening; 

however, careless handling can result in 

unpleasant cuts or punctures. Handle ˜sh ˜rmly, 

but carefully, or use a landing net to stabilize ˜sh 

while you unhook and measure them. 
The cat˜shes possess a mild, but painful, venom 
that can be introduced when a person is pricked 

by spines at the front of the pectoral or dorsal 

˜ns. Protect yourself by holding the ˜sh from the 

underside, with your ˜ngers ˜rmly beneath the 

pectoral spines. The barbels of cat˜sh are harmless. 
Bass, crappie, and small cat˜sh can be safely 
held by putting your thumb into their mouth and 

pinching their lower lip. Walleye, gar, and large 

trout have sharp teeth that can in˝ict a painful 

wound when lipped. Grip these ˜sh around the 

back of the head, above the gills. 
White bass, striped bass, and walleye have sharp 
edges on their gill plates that can slice a ˜nger. 
The ˜ns of sun˜shes, bass, and the walleye 
family become rigid when the ˜sh is threatened. 

Slide your hand down over the ˜ns of small ˜sh 

and hold them ˜rmly. Grasp larger ˜sh over the 

back of the head, above the gills. 
Don™t let a struggling ˜sh sink your own hooks 
into you. Keep hands and legs away from ˝opping 

˜sh and use hemostats or needle-nose pliers to 

safely remove the hooks from ˜sh. 
12 | An Introduction to Fishing 
Represents a feeding relationship 
Represents one complete food chain 
Represents return of nutrients to 
the food chain through the actions 

of scavengers and decomposers 
Pelvic Fin 
Anal Fin 
FIG. 5.3ŠFood webs are 
interconnected food chains that 

show the feeding relations within 

a community. A food chain shows 

what eats what. Where arrows 

converge, competition may occur.
Aquatic Food Web               Spiny Dorsal Fin 
Soft Dorsal Fin 
Brain 
Gills 
Stomach 
Liver 
Pelvic Fin 
Lateral Line 
Caudal (Tail) Fin 
Pectoral Fin 
Operculum (Gill Cover) 
Nostrils 
Swim Bladder 
Backbone 
Dorsal Fin 
Tail Fin 
Muscle 
Scales 
Lateral Line 
Anal Fin 
Urinary Bladder 
Heart 
Scale 
Largemouth Bass: Joseph Tomelleri; Scale: David Besenger; Fish Cut-away and Food Web diagram: Mark Raithel 
Aquatic Food Web 
A food chain shows how energy from the sun 
moves from producers (plants) to herbivores 

(plant eaters) to carnivores (meat eaters) 

and omnivores (plant and meat eaters). 

Food chains show what eats what. However, 

because most animals eat many di˚erent 

kinds of plants or animals, di˚erent food 

chains are interconnected. 
Understanding aquatic habitats and food 
webs can help us be successful at catching 

˜sh. If you know what makes a ˜sh a ˜sh 

(its anatomy and how it uses its body parts 

to move, etc.), what your ˜sh looks like (˜sh 

identi˜cation), where it likes to live and hide 

(its preferred habitat), and what it likes to eat, 

you will know where to ˜nd it and how to 

catch it. 
Cray˚sh 
Represents one complete food chain 
Worm 
Great blue heron 
Gizzard shad 
Daphnia Bullfrog tadpole 
Pond snail 
Caddis˜y larva 
Green sun˚sh 
Largemouth bass 
Algae 
Cattail 
Coontail 
Muskrat 
Represents a feeding relationship 
Bacteria 
Represents return of nutrients to 
the food chain through the actions 
Decomposers and scavengers 
of scavengers and decomposers 
Secondary consumers 
Primary consumers Producers
An Introduction to Fishing  
| 13 
                              ' ·· 
:·-· .·::.,;::.,.ir:~ -. . . 'Ł. ·. .. -.··~=---=----.. · .. , .. , .. _ ·: .. ·_· .. --~--~ \,~~ Common Missouri Fishes 
Largemouth Bass 
Largemouth bass are plentiful in lakes and 

ponds. Even a small pond may hold big ˜sh. 

They often hold near cover, such as aquatic 

vegetation, docks, or timber. Bass eat ˜sh, 

cray˜sh, large insects, and occasionally, frogs, 

mice, snakes, or other small animals. Adult bass 

commonly run 10 to 20 inches. 
Smallmouth Bass 
Smallmouth bass can be found in cool, clear 

streams and large lakes primarily in southern 

Missouri. They prefer structure, such as rocks, 

where they can ˜nd ˜sh, cray˜sh and aquatic 

insects to eat. Adult bass commonly run 10 to 18 

inches. 
White Bass 
White bass inhabit the deeper pools of streams 

and the open waters of lakes and reservoirs. 

They feed primarily on other ˜sh, but also may 

eat emerging aquatic insects. Adult white bass 

commonly run 9 to 15 inches. 
Bluegill/Sun˜sh 
Found in ponds, lakes, and streams, bluegills 

and sun˜sh thrive in warm, clear water with 

aquatic vegetation and insects. They often feed 

in shallow water and can be caught on worms, 

crickets, or ˝ies. Average size is about 6 inches. 
Channel Cat˜sh 
Channel cat˜sh live in ponds, lakes, and streams, 

and bite on a variety of live, cut or prepared 

baits ˜shed on the bottom. The best ˜shing is at 

night or following a heavy rain. Adults run 12 to 

32 inches long. 
Flathead Cat˜sh 
Flathead cat˜sh can be found in reservoirs or 

large streams with slow current. During the day, 

they prefer deeper water or cover. At night they 

move into ri˙es and shallow areas to feed upon 

other ˜sh and cray˜sh. Adults commonly run 15 

to 45 inches. 
14 | An Introduction to Fishing 
Joseph Tomelleri 
                             Joseph Tomelleri 
Carp 
Carp prefer shallow water and feed on plant 

and animal material. They bite best on worms, 

canned corn, and dough balls. Carp usually 

range from 1 to 8 pounds, but often grow much 

larger. Their ˝esh is bony, but ˝avorful. 
White Crappie 
Crappie usually prefer cover, such as brush piles 

placed by anglers, and submerged trees. They 

bite best on small jigs or minnows ˜shed slowly 

and sometimes quite deep. These popular food 

˜sh usually run from 9 to 11 inches. 
Goggle-eye 
Goggle-eye, or rock bass, live in Ozark streams. 

They prefer nooks and crannies of root wads 

and undercut rocks in running water. They feed 

on cray˜sh, small ˜sh and aquatic insects. Adult 

goggle-eye commonly run up to 11 inches. 
Golden Redhorse 
Golden redhorse can be found primarily in 

Ozark and northeast Missouri streams. These 

bottom feeders prefer the deeper pools of clear, 

gravelly rivers and streams, where they feed on 

aquatic insects. Adults commonly run 9 to 15 

inches. 
Rainbow Trout 
Trout prefer cool, ˝owing water, but some are 

stocked in lakes in winter for anglers to catch. 

They bite on worms and insects and are a 

favorite of ˝y ˜shers. Trout typically range from 

10 to 16 inches. 
Walleye 
Walleye are native to large rivers and streams 

in Missouri and have been stocked in reservoirs 

and selected streams. They feed on a variety of 

˜sh, including shad. They prefer deeper pools 

with rocky or submerged log cover in rivers, 

and creek channels and drop-o˚s in lakes and 

reservoirs. Adult walleye commonly run 12 to 28 

inches. 
An Introduction to Fishing  
| 15 
                                 Where To Look 
Fish require healthy surroundings, and essential ˜sh 
habitat includes food, shelter, and good water quality. Fish 

might be found in water scarcely deep enough to cover 

their backs, or they might swim in unfathomable depths. 
Each species of ˜sh may inhabit di˚erent places at 
various times of the year and eat di˚erent foods. 
Anglers have been trying to ˜gure out the intricacies 
of ˜sh location since people used bone ˜shhooks. There 

are still no absolutes, but we have discovered some pretty 

reliable indicators of ˜sh location. Study the stream and 

pond art on these pages for hints to ˜sh location. 
Food 
Fish tend to concentrate where food is plentiful. Schools 

of minnows or other prey will attract larger ˜sh to feed on 

them. Fish take advantage of many feeding opportunities, 

including hatching insects and migrating frogs. 
Signs of small ˜sh activity can lead you to ˜shing 
hotspots. Minnows darting above the surface are often 

trying to escape from larger ˜sh. Numerous small ˜sh in the 

shallows could mean that larger ˜sh will later arrive to feed. 
Cover 
Fish use cover to escape predators and as an aid in 

ambushing prey. Some ˜sh spend most of their lives near 

cover; others move from cover only to feed. 
Cover can be loosely de˜ned as anything that will hide 
or protect the ˜sh. Aquatic plants, docks, brush, rocks, 

and logs all provide coverŠas do overhanging trees, 

cli˚s, or swimming platforms, which shade the ˜sh and 

make them less visible to other ˜sh, predatory birds, and 

humans. 
Much cover is visible. Aquatic plants grow near the 
bank, fallen trees lean over the water, boat docks and 

swimming platforms rim the lake, ˝ooded timber reaches 

above the water™s surface, and loose rock often line 

shorelines. 
A lot of cover cannot be seen. Underwater rocks 
and sunken logs, as well as ˜sh shelters of sticks, brush, 

or discarded Christmas trees that anglers have placed 

to attract ˜sh can be found on many lake and river 

bottoms. 
Rocks 
Lake Basin Margin 
Flooded 
Points 
Timber and Shade 
Stair Step 
Aquatic Plants 
Along Dropo˚ 
Submerged 
Stumps 
David Besenger 
16 | An Introduction to Fishing 
                                                             Riprap Banks 
Deep 
River Bends 
Holes Below 
Ri˛es 
Behind 

Wing Dams 
Feeder Stream Mouths 
Eddies 
David Besenger 
Structure 
Drop-o˚s, points, ridges, and sandbars shape the beds of 
lakes and rivers. These structural elements often attract 

more ˜sh than do ˝at or gently sloping bottoms. 
You can ˜nd good places to ˜sh from clues on land or 
in the water. Land points often extend into a lake; a path 

between ˝ooded timber indicates an old river channel; a 

break in a wave pattern reveals an underwater island and 

the aquatic vegetation edge tells where the water has 

become too deep to allow sunlight to penetrate to the 

bottom. 
Edges 
Feeding ˜sh seem to favor transition zones between 

di˚erent habitats. The edge of a plant bed, for example, 

usually produces the most ˜sh. In rivers, ˜sh often feed 

near current breaks, where the ˝ow is de˝ected or slowed. 

These are often visible from the surface. 
Similarly, the break between muddy and clear water, the 
edges of main lake basins, the margin where mud bottom 

meets gravel bottom and drop-o˚s also attract ˜sh. 
Deep or Shallow? 
Fish respond to both feeding opportunities and light 

levels. Generally, ˜sh are in shallower water in low light 

and choppy conditions, and in deeper water when the sun 

is bright and winds are calm. 
Fish are often shallower in the spring and early 
summer. Summer heat sends ˜sh deeper to ˜nd cooler 

temperatures, but not to the bottom, where there is little 

oxygen. Fall ˜sh tend to remain deep. Fish in ice-covered 

lakes often stay near the surface, especially in late winter. 
Day or Night 
Fishing can be good at any time. However, ˜sh seem to 

prefer the low-light conditions of morning and evening 
better than the bright sun of midday. Cloud cover creates a 

twilight of its own and may encourage ˜sh to bite. 
Cat˜sh, bass, crappie, and many other species of ˜sh 
will bite day or night. In some clear lakes, ˜shing is better 

at night than during the day. Big ˜sh seem to be less 

selective and easier to catch when it is dark. 
Fishing at night is di˛cult even for experienced anglers. 
Beginning anglers can experiment with ˜shing at night 

by ˜shing during the evening and continuing to ˜sh until 

after dark. 
Weather Conditions 
Weather conditions certainly a˚ect ˜sh, but not always in 

predictable ways. The following statements often prove true: 

Ł Fishing is good before and during a gentle rain but 

poor during and after a thunderstorm. 
Ł Except in the heat of summer, warm fronts improve 

˜shing, and the longer the front stays, the better. Cold 

fronts often reduce ˜sh movements. 
Ł A light to moderate wind is better than no wind. Fish 

will move shallower to feed in windy conditions. Fishing 

is usually better where the wind blows into the shore 

than along protected shorelines. 
Ł The best time to go ˜shing is whenever you safely can. 
Patterns 
Patterning means using information you have learned 
from the ˜sh to ˜nd more ˜sh. We can assume whatever 

caused a ˜sh to locate in one place would prompt others 

to be in similar places. 
Catching a ˜sh o˚ a windswept point, for example, 
could mean that other ˜sh will be located on that point 

and on similar points throughout the lake. What works for 

one ˜sh often works for others of the same species. 
Patterns may hold for a few hours or all day, or they 
may persist for weeks. Some patterns repeat themselves 

year after year. Experiment until you discover a pattern 

then use that pattern to catch more ˜sh. 
An Introduction to Fishing  
| 17 
                              Let™s Go Fishing 
Patience 
Many ˜sh are constantly on the move, looking for food. 
You can either intercept them or wait for them to come 

to you. If you know you are in a good spotŠfor example 

where you have seen other people catching ˜sh or have 

caught them yourselfŠthen it might be best to wait for 

them to return. 
If you are ˜shing unfamiliar waters, then it is often 
wiser to search for good ˜shing spots. Keep in mind, 

however, that even the best ˜shing holes do not produce 

nonstop action. Patience has always been a virtue among 

anglers. 
Stealth 
Being quiet is almost as important as being patient. The 

bigger the ˜sh the more skittish they are. Commotion on 

a dock, along the shore or in a boat can scare ˜sh away 

or cause them to stop feeding. Conversation is ˜ne, but 

jumping or running or banging equipment will reduce 

your catch. Think sneaky. 
You can usually approach closer to ˜sh under cloudy 
or windy conditions or in ˝owing water. When ˜shing in 

streams, wear muted colors and keep a low pro˜le. Try not 

to let your shadow fall over areas you are ˜shing. 
Stealth also applies to the way you present your bait 
or lure. Don™t cast directly to the spot where you think the 

˜sh are. Instead, cast beyond it and reel until your bait or 

lure is among the ˜sh. 
Recognizing a Bite 
Fish may hit a bait or lure ferociously, tentatively or 

somewhere in between, making it di˛cult to predict how 

you may see or feel a bite. 
Bobbers could jiggle, plunge downward or skate across 
the water. If the ˜sh swims upward after taking the bait, 

your stick bobber may lay ˝at or ˝oat higher in the water. 
When bottom ˜shing, your rod tip may plunge 
downward or quiver, or your line may unexpectedly go 

slack. 
If you are holding your ˜shing pole, you may feel a tap, 
a tug or a pull, or the line may go slack. 
David Stonner 
18
 | An Introduction to Fishing 
                                                           
 Jim Rathert 
Setting the Hook 
When you suspect a bite, have your rod pointed in the 
direction of the bait or lure with no slack in the line. 

Setting the hook calls for a sharp backward and upward 

movement of the rod. Fish have tough mouths, so it takes 

a good sharp action to set the hook. Sharp hooks help 

ensure that the hook sets well. 
Beginning anglers sometimes set their hook too 
hard, which can break their line, straighten their hook, or 

pull the hook out of the ˜sh™s mouth. If your drag is set 

correctly, you can set the hook vigorously. Stretch in your 

line, the drag, and the bend of the ˜shing rod will absorb 

much of the pressure of the strike to keep from ripping the 

hook out. 
Playing the Fish 
After the hook is set, anglers should hold their rod tip high, 

keeping pressure on the ˜sh. This will keep the ˜sh™s head 

up and will help keep the line tight. Keeping the ˜sh™s head 

up is important because it reduces the chance of the ˜sh 

getting tangled in rocks, vegetation, or other structures. 

Keeping the line tight is important because it helps keep 

the hook embedded in the ˜sh™s mouth. If a ˜sh senses 

slack in the line, it may have a chance to shake the hook 

free, especially if the hook isn™t set well. 
Playing a ˜sh is fun, but a ˜sh should be brought in 
as soon as possible if it is going to be released. Shorter 

playing time reduces ˜sh stress or death, which is 

important in catch-and-release ˜shing. Allow the ˜sh to 

run, taking line from the reel. Recover line by lifting the 

rod handle and then lowering the rod tip as you reel in, 

pumping the ˜sh closer. Last-moment struggles of ˜sh 

often surprise anglers and result in lost ˜sh. When playing 

a large ˜sh, loosen the drag slightly as the ˜sh gets close. 
Proper Fish Handling 
Once a ˜sh is brought to shore, proper handling will 

help prevent injury to the angler and to the ˜sh. When 

bringing in a ˜sh, anglers should be ready with necessary 

equipment like a landing net and needle-nosed pliers or a 

similar tool for grabbing the hook. Net ˜sh head ˜rst. Place 

your net in the water and guide the ˜sh toward it. When 

the ˜sh is over the net, lift it ˜rmly and quickly. If you have 

no net, play the ˜sh until it is tired and cradle it in your 

hand. 
To avoid removing the protective slime coating on the 
˜sh, you should wet your hands before touching the ˜sh. 

Don™t let ˜sh ˝op on the ground or the boat bottom. They 

could injure themselves. Don™t put ˜ngers in their gills 
or eyes or squeeze them too hard.  Leave the ˜sh in the 

water, if possible. 
Some ˜sh, like largemouth bass, can be grasped and 
lifted by their lower lip, which tends to calm them. Larger 

˜sh should also have their midsections supported.  Avoid 

the sharp teeth of some species like walleye and trout, 

and be careful not to hook your ˜ngers or hands when 

handling hooked ˜sh. 
You should grasp small ˜sh around the body, ˝attening 
the spines as you slide your hand down over the head and 

midsection. 
With cat˜sh, anglers should get a ˜rm grip around the 
midsection, taking care to avoid the sharp spines in the 

dorsal and pectoral ˜ns. 
Fish gills can be easily damaged, so anglers should not 
touch them or lift the ˜sh by the gill covers. 
Hook Removal 
Keep the ˜sh in water or directly in the angler™s wet hand. 

The hook can be removed by carefully backing it out 

through the hole made in the lip when the hook was set. 

If the hook is through the lip of a smaller ˜sh, hold the 

body of the ˜sh and remove the hook with the other hand. 

Hemostats or needle-nose pliers will help to remove hooks 

set deeper in the mouth, throat, or tongue of the ˜sh. 
An Introduction to Fishing  
| 19 
                               Measuring 
                  Wi
th a deeply hooked ˜sh, it could do more harm to 
remove the hook than it would to simply clip the line. In 
this case, it is preferable to cut the line, leaving the hook 

still lodged in the ˜sh. Most deeply hooked ˜sh survive if 

the line is clipped and the ˜sh is quickly released. 
Keep or Release? 
Some anglers ˜sh primarily for sport and release all the ˜sh 

they catch. Others like to eat some species or particular 

sizes of ˜sh, but release all others. Many times regulations 

require us to release ˜sh. 
Fish have a good chance of surviving after being 
caught, if they are handled carefully. Released ˜sh can be 

caught over and over again. They grow large and produce 

even more ˜sh for our pleasure. 
There is nothing wrong with keeping ˜sh to eat, so long 
as you obey regulations. On the other hand, give every 

˜sh you release, even small ˜sh and nontarget species, the 

respect of careful handling. 
Good catch-and-release technique begins even before 
you catch a ˜sh. Choose lines and equipment that will 

bring ˜sh in quickly, so they don™t exhaust all their energy 

in a prolonged battle. Fish often deeply swallow live bait, 

which can make releasing the ˜sh unharmed di˛cult. Use 

arti˜cial lures in favor of live bait if you plan to catch and 

release ˜sh. Fish that hit arti˜cial baits are less likely to be 

hooked deeply enough to damage vital organs and have a 

high survival rate. 
Measure most ˜sh from the tip of the snout to the 

end of the tail, with the ˜sh laid ˝at and the tail 

lobes pressed together. 
Prepare for easy release by squeezing barbs of hooks 
˝at with pliers or ˜ling them o˚. Barbless hooks won™t 

cost you ˜sh, if you keep a tight line, and they allow you to 

unhook ˜sh without causing serious wounds. 
Release ˜sh as soon as possible. There™s time for a quick 
picture of a ˜sh, but the longer the ˜sh remains out of the 

water, the less its chances of surviving. 
A stressed ˜sh often can be revived, however. Hold it 
gently and right-side up facing away from you in the water. 

When you sense that it can swim away under its own 

power, let it go. 
Hung Up? 
It™s hard to imagine moving a hook and sinker 

through the water for any length of time without 

occasionally getting hung up on a rock, a stick, a 

log, a dock, a cable, plants, or some other object. 

Snags are part of ˜shing. 
When you get snagged, try to free the hook by 
holding your rod tip high and jiggling it. Often it 

helps to move to one side or the other to change 

the angle. 
If the hook remains snagged, you may need 
to break your line. Do not just pull hard with your 

˜shing pole, or it may snap instead of the line. 

Point the rod tip at the snag, tighten your drag 

all the way or hold the spool, and steadily pull or 

back away until the line breaks or the hook pulls 

free. Should the latter happen, check your hook 

and replace it if it is bent or broken. If the line is 

frayed near the hook, cut it o˚ and retie. 
Measuring Fish: Noppadol Paothong; Boy Fishing: David Stonner 
20 | An Introduction to Fishing 
Cleaning 
 Cleaning ˜sh is easy after a little practice. You can clean 
˜sh on a dock, paddle, cooler lid or ˝at rock. Many ˜shing 

accesses and parks provide ˜sh cleaning stations with 

water for rinsing ˜sh. 
Handy ˜sh cleaning tools include a sharp knife, a scaler 
and a glove to protect your hand and help grip the ˜sh. 

Cleaning ˜sh on old newspaper will make clean-up easy. 
Remove the scales from small ˜sh that will be cooked 

whole or large ˜sh that will be steaked by scraping the skin 

with a dull knife, a spoon, or an inexpensive scaling tool. 
Pan-dress ˜sh by cutting along the sides of the ˜ns on 

the back and behind the stomach and pulling them out. 

Cut o˚ the head, then slit the belly and scrape out the 

entrails. 
  Fillet larger ˜sh by cutting down to the backbone behind 

the head and sliding the knife blade with a sawing motion 

toward the tail. Slice out the rib bones from top to bottom. 
Skin ˜llets by cutting down to the skin near the tail, 

turning the knife blade and, pulling ˜rmly on the tail 

section, sliding and sawing the knife between the skin and 

the ˝esh. 
Most anglers choose to ˜llet and skin bass, crappie, walleye, 
and carp. Sun˜sh and bluegill are usually scaled and pan-

dressed. Remove the head, entrails and pectoral ˜ns from 

trout. Trout scales are so small, it is not necessary to remove 

them. Peel the tough skin from cat˜sh with pliers and 

˜llet the meat or cut it into chunks. Steak very large ˜sh by 

cutting down through the backbone at 1-inch intervals. 
Cli˚ White 
An Introduction to Fishing  
| 21 
                        
                                                    ˛Cooking 
Fish tastes great and is good for you. It is high in digestible 
protein and low in fat. Fish is a wonderful natural food, 

especially when you are eating the ones you caught 

yourself. Some people can be sensitive to certain chemicals 

occasionally found in ˜sh. The Missouri Department of 

Health and Senior Services (DHSS) has a website that 

describes the ˜sh consumption advisories and list problem 

waters. You can view that at 
short.mdc.mo.gov/Zwb
. Fish can be fried, smoked, broiled, baked, poached, 
steamed, microwaved, or boiled, or put in chowders or 

stews. Use simple recipes that let the ˜ne ˝avor of the ˜sh 

come through. Follow recipes carefully and don™t overcook. 
Fish ˝esh is done when it becomes opaque and ˝akes 
easily. Test for doneness by probing the thickest portions 

with a fork. If the ˝esh ˝akes easily or separates from 

the bone, it is done. Further cooking will detract from its 

˝avor and texture. 
As is the case with sweet corn, the sooner you can get 
the ˜sh to the table, the better it will taste. Fish ˝esh is 

sterile when it comes out of the water but it starts to go 

bad quickly, unless you take care of it. Preserve the quality 

of the ˜sh you catch by keeping them alive or by keeping 

them cold. 
During cool months, live baskets, stringers or live wells 
will keep your ˜sh alive until it™s time to go home. When 

˜shing in warmer months, bring along a cooler of ice to 

keep your catch in. Drain the cooler occasionally, so that 

dead ˜sh do not soak in the water. 
Use ˜sh quickly. Refrigerated ˜sh begin to lose their 
˝avor after only 24 hours. Frozen ˜sh start to deteriorate in 

quality after two to four months. 
Some ˜sh, such as white bass and largemouth bass, have 
a strong-tasting dark layer of ˝esh along their lateral lines 

that should be cut away before being cooked or frozen. 
Pan-frying 
All ˜sh are excellent candidates for the 
frying pan. Cooking oil keeps the ˝esh 

moist, and a coating keeps the ˜sh™s 

natural juices from cooking out. 
Dust pan-dressed small ˜sh or the 
˜llets from larger ˜sh in seasoned ˝our 

and place them in an open, heavy skillet 

in which about 1/4 inch of cooking oil 

has been heated to almost ﬁfoaming.ﬂ 

Don™t crowd the ˜sh or they will come out 

soggy. Cook each side over medium heat 

until brown. The ˝esh ˝akes easily when 

done. 
For a thicker coating, dip ˜llets in milk 
or beaten egg and then coat them with 
crumbs, cornmeal, or seasoned ˝our before cooking. Drain 

the pieces on paper towels before serving. 
Deep frying 
Use a thermometer to ensure your deep frying oil is 
between 360 and 380 degrees. You can deep fry in a skillet 

by using enough oil to completely submerge the ˜sh. 
Dip the ˜sh in batter and place them gently in the oil. 
Avoid overcrowding them. Cook from 2-5 minutes until 

golden brown. Dry on paper towels. Allow the oil to reheat 

between batches. 
Baking 
Baking works well for large ˜sh. Line a shallow baking dish 
with aluminum foil for easy removal of the ˜sh. Baste the 

˜sh with a seasoned butter and lemon juice mixture, cover 

the pan with aluminum foil or a lid and cook for 10 to 30 

minutes, depending on the thickness of the ˜sh, at 375 

degrees. Test frequently to see if the ˜sh is done. Baste the 

˜sh in its own juices during cooking for more ˝avor. Save 

the pan juices for soups or sauces. 
Broiling and Barbecuing 
The high heat of broiling and barbecuing can dry ˜sh 
˝esh, unless they are basted often with sauce or oils. Broil 

skin side up ˜rst, then turn carefully. Thin ˜llets do not 

need turning. A small amount of liquid in the broiling pan 

will help keep ˜sh moist. When barbecuing, use a basket-

like ˜sh holder sprayed with cooking oil. 
Microwaving 
Place ˜sh in a dish or on a plate with the thickest portions 
to the outside. Brush ˜sh with butter/lemon mixture and 

cover with waxed paper. If ˜sh ﬁpops,ﬂ cook at a lower 

setting. Check for doneness frequently. Add liquid and 

seasonings and cover dish to poach or steam ˜sh. 
Cooking Methods 
Pan Fry 
Deep Fry 
Bake 
Broil 
Barbeque 
Microwave 
Sun˜sh 
˜˛˜˛˚˛˚˛˚˛˚˛Bluegill 
˜˛˜˛˚˛˚˛˚˛˚˛Cat˜sh 
˚˛˜˛˚˛˚˛Bass 
˜˛˚˛˚˛˜˛˜˛˚˛Trout 
˚˛˜˛˜˛˜˛˚˛Walleye 
˜˛˜˛˜˛˚˛˜˛Carp 
˚˛˜˛Sucker 
˚˛˜˛˜˛Excellent 
˚˛Good 
22
 | An Introduction to Fishing 
                                                      Fishing Rules/Regulations 
 Fishing regulations make ˜shing better. The regulations 
help us share our aquatic resources. Length limits give 

˜sh an opportunity to grow and spawn while slot limits 

provide us with ˜sh of varying lengths. 
Golden Rules 
The simple courtesies and conventions of ˜shing all fall 

under the golden rule: Do unto others as you would have 

them do unto you. 
Everyone has a right to the ˜sh. Don™t crowd other 
anglers to the point where you tangle lines. 
Shouting, screaming, playing loud music, throwing 
rocks into the water, and other noises can scare the ˜sh 

and ruin the fun of other anglers. 
Fishing does not give you the right to trespass. Ask 
permission before ˜shing and show respect for private 

property. 
Dispose of all your litter, including bait containers, cans, 
˜shing line, and ˜shing equipment packages. 
Watch your backcast so you don™t hook angling 
companions or other anglers. Alert others before trying to 

pull a snagged lure free, for the lure could sail back in your 

direction. 
Observe all ˜shing regulations. Length limits, seasons, 
daily or possession limits, and restrictions on methods are 

part of the overall management of the ˜sheries. The future 

of ˜shing requires anglers to heed regulations. 
Fishing Permit 
Everyone over the age of 15 and under the age of 65 

must have a permit to ˜sh in Missouri. The exceptions are 

residents and members of their households ˜shing on 

waters completely enclosed by their property and people 

with certi˜able disabilities. On some specially managed 

waters, such as trout parks, anglers also need a daily tag. 

Daily, annual, and lifetime permits are available. See the 

current 
A Summary of Missouri Fishing Regulations
 for 
details, or go to 
mdc.mo.gov
. General Rules 
Length limits, daily limits, and seasons vary somewhat on 

specially managed bodies of water. Speci˜c rules can be 

found in the ˜shing regulations and are often posted at 

accesses and ˜shing areas. Several general rules apply to 

most angling situations: 

Ł Rod and reel anglers are limited to three unlabeled 

poles at one time. 
Ł The ˜sh you keep must be kept separate or identi˜able 

from ˜sh taken by another person. 
Ł  Game ˜sh not hooked in the mouth or jaw must be 

returned to the water unharmed immediately after 

being caught. 
Daily and Possession Limits 
The ˜shing regulations list limits for most species of 

˜sh. While on the water, you can possess no more than 

the daily limit for that area. Possession limit is twice the 

statewide daily limit, which also includes ˜sh in your 

vehicle, cooler, refrigerator, or freezer. 
Live Bait 
While live bait may be collected and used for ˜shing in 

some areas, there are regulations about what may be 

used for bait and how it may be collected. Also, live bait is 

prohibited in some ˜shing areas. 
Do not dump your unused bait into the water. Doing 
so can spread invasive species. Unused live bait of all 

types should be disposed of in a trash dumpster when 

your ˜shing trip is over. Otherwise, unwanted animals and 

plants can invade local water, damage habitat, and ruin 

˜shing. 
An Introduction to Fishing  
| 23 
      .. ooo AT&T Llt: 
9:43 AM 
W 55'11 Where to wet a line 
Now that you know how to ˜sh, go online to 
˜nd conservation areas where you can put your 

skills to use. The Conservation Department™s 

online atlas will help you ˜nd a place near you or 

across the state to ˜sh, hunt, hike, and enjoy the 

outdoors. Go to 
mdc.mo.gov/atlas
. The free ﬁMO Fishingﬂ app (
short.mdc.mo.gov/ 
Zoh
) will help plan your next ˜shing trip. Search 
 for nearby bodies of water and view whether it 
 has ˜sh attractors, boat ramps, parking lots, or 
 restrooms available for public use. You can also 
 view a ˜sh identi˜cation guide, the current ˜shing 
 report and ˜shing prospects, and purchase your 
 ˜shing permit. Try it now! 
   
Sport Fish Restoration Program 
Anglers across the nation are paying the bills for 
 ˜sheries research and management; development 
 of new ˜shing lakes, and lake and stream accesses; 
 ˜sh hatcheries and educational programs, 
 and other activities aimed at maintaining and 
 improving sport ˜shing. A special tax on each 
 purchase of ˜shing tackle, related items, and 
 motorboat fuel goes into the Wallop-Breaux 
 Trust Fund, which is dedicated to recreational 
 ˜sheries and related boating. State ˜sh and 
 wildlife agencies are allocated money from the 
 fund based on area of surface water in the state 
 and the number of licensed anglers. This funding 
 arrangement, known as the Sport Fish Restoration 
 Program, is hailed as a model of e˛cient ﬁpay-

your-own-wayﬂ ˜nancing. 
The Missouri Department of Conservation 
 receives monies every year from the fund, paid 
 as reimbursements for 75 percent of the cost 
 of approved projects. Keep your eyes open for 
 the Sport Fish Restoration Program logo, shown 
 here. You should ˜nd it on 
 ˜shing tackle packaging 
 and displayed at areas 
 wher
e the funds 
 were used. 
© Copyright Revised 2017  FIS152 
